Turposely butts him with his head and opens up a bloody cut above his left eye, causing Rocky to get riled up. He attacks and ends the fight with a flurry of blistering punches. The ring is littered with rubbish as Rocky leaves. He is called a "bum" by a disrespectful, angry female fan as he bums a cigarette from another spectator and enters the shabby locker-room. There, he puts on a tattered, tan-colored robe with the words "The Italian Stallion" sewn on the back in white letters. The fight's promoter distributes slim profits between Rocky and his opponent:

Promoter (to Rocky's opponent): Forty dollars, less fifteen dollars locker and cornerman, five dollars shower and towel, seven percent tax, comes to $17.20. You fought a good fight, Spider.
Promoter (to Rocky): ...Sixty-five dollars, less fifteen dollars locker and cornerman, five dollars shower and towel, and seven percent tax, comes to $40.55.

The credits continue to play, as Rocky Balboa, already labeled as a "bum," is portrayed in a series of vignettes as a simple-minded, hang-dog-eyed, inarticulate bum - a 30-year-old Philadelphia fighter who resorts to small, two-bit club bouts to make a meager living. He walks along a dark sidewalk littered with rubbish along the curb, while tossing and catching a small ball with one hand. As he often does, he pauses at the window of a local pet shop to look and wave at a litter of puppies, passes his boxing gym across the street, and stops to say hello to (and swig from a wine bottle) a group of street-corner singers (one of whom is his brother, Frank Stallone, Jr.). He lives a lonely but simple life in a dingy, cramped, one-room, second-floor apartment (at the end of a row of similar brick apartments) in South Philly - in a deteriorating, bleak area of the city. He has rolled and propped up an old mattress (with stuffing showing) to serve as a punching bag.

His only company is a 45 rpm record player (that he flips on), his pet turtles Cuff and Link, a tiny goldfish named Moby Dick, and a curling wall poster of heavyweight boxing idol Rocky Marciano. [All of these items reflect Rocky's dreams of grandeur and richness. Cuff-links are normally worn with fancy dress shirts, and Moby Dick is the largest of the creatures in the sea! Rocky also idolizes another Rocky from an earlier era.] He jokes to the turtles about his poverty-stricken, disappointing existence:

If you guys could sing or dance, I wouldn't be doin' this, you know?

In front of a mirror, he practices telling a joke about the turtle food, and then takes a few ice cubes from his half-sized icebox and applies them to his badly-swollen, cut eye.

(Wednesday, November 26, 1975)

The next morning, wearing a black hat and leather jacket, he visits the pet shop again and politely speaks to the painfully-shy, 30 year old, dark-haired, gawky, and spectacled Adrian (Talia Shire) - the timid wall-flower clerk behind the counter. Flirting with her, he repeats the "bad" joke about the turtle food getting caught in his pets' throats, and how he has to hit them on their shells - making them "shell-shocked." But Adrian offers the thuggish customer little encouragement in return for his interest. Afterwards, he plays with Butkus (Stallone's own dog), a bull mastiff placed in a large cage.

His next stop is the waterfront area, where he walks by a group of mafioso types next to a car, and is asked: "Fightin' again?" As the strong-arm collections man for a local numbers racket, he intimidates one of the laborers to collect a two hundred dollar loan for his employer - loan shark Tom Gazzo (Joe Spinell). Terror-struck, Bob pleads for Rocky not to hit his face or break his thumb, as Rocky tells him (with another metaphor about 'singing and dancing'):

You wanna dance, you gotta pay the band, you understand? If you wanna borrow, you gotta pay the man. Hey, I ain't emotionally involved, Bob, ya understand? Give us the money.

Thinking for himself, and revealing his kindness and heart-of-gold sensitive side, Rocky accepts $130 in cash and takes a verbal IOU - it's "still seventy dollars light." He refuses to take the coat of the desperate man. Bob suggests that he'll tape up his hand to fake that his thumb was broken, while Rocky walks away, advising: "You shoulda planned ahead." On a train trestle, Rocky is picked up in a car by Gazzo for the payoff (Rocky receives $20, a cut of the loan payment), and receives his next assignment to collect a 3-week late payment from Del Rio. Gazzo's driver/bodyguard Buddy asks the unsuspecting, dumb Rocky:

Bodyguard: Did ya get the license number?
Rocky: Of what?
Bodyguard: The truck that run over your face.

When Rocky is dropped off, he reasons that the debtor couldn't work to pay off the loan with broken thumbs. Gazzo warns him about not following orders:

Gazzo: When you don't do what I tell you to do, you make me look bad, Rock.
Rocky: I figure if, look, I figure if I break the guy's thumb, he gets laid off, right? He can't make no more money...
Gqpazzo: Yeah, well, don't figure. Let me do the figurin'. OK, Rock? From here on, just let me do the figurin'. You know? These guys think that we're runnin' some kind of charity or somethin', that they're gonna get off light. From here on in, do what I tell ya to do, because it's bad for my reputation. 
Ya understand?
END ROCKY